a bad penny always turns up a barking dog never bites a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush a cat may look at a king a chain is only as strong as its weakest link a change is as good as a rest a dog is a man's best friend a drowning man will clutch at a straw a fish always rots from the head down a fool and his money are soon parted a friend in need is a friend indeed a golden key can open any door a good beginning makes a good ending a good man is hard to find a house divided against itself cannot stand a person is known by the company he keeps a house is not a home a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step a leopard cannot change its spots a little knowledge is a dangerous thing a little learning is a dangerous thing a little of what you fancy does you good a man is known by his friends a man who is his own lawyer has a fool for his client a miss is as good as a mile a new broom sweeps clean a nod's as good as a wink to a blind horse a penny saved is a penny earned a picture paints a thousand words a place for everything and everything in its place a poor workman always blames his tools a person is known by the company he keeps a problem shared is a problem halved a prophet is not recognized in his own land a rising tide lifts all boats a rolling stone gathers no moss a soft answer turneth away wrath a stitch in time saves nine a swarm in may is worth a load of hay a swarm in june is worth a silver spoon but a swarm in july is not worth a fly a thing of beauty is a joy forever a trouble shared is a trouble halved a volunteer is worth twenty pressed men a watched pot never boils a woman is only a woman, but a good cigar is a smoke a woman's place is in the home a woman's work is never done a word to the wise is enough absence makes the heart grow fonder absolute power corrupts absolutely accidents will happen in the best regulated families . actions speak louder than words adversity makes strange bedfellows after a storm comes a calm all good things come to he who waits all good things must come to an end all is grist that comes to the mill all publicity is good publicity all roads lead to rome all that glisters is not gold all that glitters is not gold all the world loves a lover all things come to those who wait all things must pass all work and no play makes jack a dull boy all you need is love all's fair in love and war all's for the best in the best of all possible worlds all's well that ends well a miss is as good as a mile an apple a day keeps the doctor away an army marches on its stomach an englishman's home is his castle an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure another day, another dollar any port in a storm appearances can be deceptive april is the cruellest month april showers bring forth may flowers as thick as thieves as you make your bed, so you must lie upon it as you sow so shall you reap ashes to ashes dust to dust ask a silly question and you'll get a silly answer ask no questions and hear no lies attack is the best form of defence bad money drives out good bad news travels fast barking dogs seldom bite be careful what you wish for beat swords into ploughshares beauty is in the eye of the beholder beauty is only skin deep beggars should not be choosers behind every great man there's a great woman better late than never better safe than sorry better the devil you know than the devil you don't better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all better to light a candle than to curse the darkness better to remain silent and be thought a fool that to speak and remove all doubt beware of greeks bearing gifts beware the ides of march big fish eat little fish birds of a feather flock together blessed are the peacemakers blood is thicker than water blue are the hills that are far away boys will be boys brevity is the soul of wit business before pleasure caesar's wife must be above suspicion carpe diem pluck the day seize the day charity begins at home charity covers a multitude of sins cheaters never win and winners never cheat cheats never prosper children and fools tell the truth children should be seen and not heard christmas comes but once a year cleanliness is next to godliness clothes maketh the man cold hands, warm heart comparisons are odious count your blessings cowards may die many times before their death crime doesn't pay cut your coat to suit your cloth dead men tell no tales devil take the hindmost discretion is the better part of valour distance lends enchantment to the view do as i say, not as i do do as you would be done by do unto others as you would have them do to you don't bite the hand that feeds you don't burn your bridges behind you don't cast your pearls before swine don't change horses in midstream don't count your chickens before they are hatched don't cross the bridge till you come to it don't cut off your nose to spite your face don't get mad, get even don't keep a dog and bark yourself don't leave your manners on the doorstep don't let the bastards grind you down don't let the cat out of the bag don't let the grass grow under your feet don't meet troubles half way don't mix business with pleasure don't put all your eggs in one basket don't put the cart before the horse don't put new wine into old bottles don't rock the boat don't shoot the messenger don't spoil the ship for a ha'porth of tar don't sweat the small stuff don't throw pearls to swine don't teach your grandma to suck eggs don't throw the baby out with the bathwater don't trust anyone over thirty don't try to run before you can walk don't try to walk before you can crawl don't upset the apple cart don't wash your dirty linen in public doubt is the beginning not the end of wisdom early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise east is east, and west is west east, west, home's best easy come, easy go eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die empty vessels make the most noise enough is as good as a feast enough is enough even a worm will turn every cloud has a silver lining every dog has its day every little helps every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost every man has his price every picture tells a story every stick has two ends everyone wants to go to heaven but nobody wants to die everything comes to him who waits failing to plan is planning to fail faint heart never won fair lady fair exchange is no robbery faith will move mountains familiarity breeds contempt feed a cold and starve a fever fight fire with fire fight the good fight finders keepers, losers weepers fine words butter no parsnips first come, first served first impressions are the most lasting first things first fish always stink from the head down fish and guests smell after three days flattery will get you nowhere fools rush in where angels fear to tread for everything there is a season for want of a nail the shoe was lost for want of a shoe the horse was lost and for want of a horse the man was lost forewarned is forearmed forgive and forget fortune favours the brave from the sublime to the ridiculous is only one step genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains genius is one percent inspiration, ninety nine percent perspiration give a man a fish and you will feed him for a day... give a dog a bad name and hang him give a man enough rope and he will hang himself give credit where credit is due give the devil his due go the extra mile god helps those who help themselves good fences make good neighbours good talk saves the food good things come in small packages good things come to those who wait great minds think alike half a loaf is better than no bread handsome is as handsome does hard cases make bad law hard work never did anyone any harm haste makes waste he that goes a borrowing, goes a sorrowing he who can does, he who cannot, teaches he who fights and runs away, may live to fight another day he who hesitates is lost he who laughs last laughs longest he who lives by the sword shall die by the sword he who pays the piper calls the tune he who sups with the devil should have a long spoon hell hath no fury like a woman scorned hindsight is always twenty twenty history repeats itself home is where the heart is honesty is the best policy hope springs eternal horses for courses if anything can go wrong, it will if a job is worth doing it is worth doing well if at first you don't succeed try, try and try again if god had meant us to fly he'd have given us wings if ifs and ands were pots and pans there'd be no work for tinkers if it ain't broke, don't fix it if life deals you lemons, make lemonade if the cap fits, wear it if the mountain won't come to mohammed, then mohammed must go to the mountain if the shoe fits, wear it if wishes were horses, beggars would ride if you build it they will come if you can't be good, be careful if you can't beat em, join em if you can't stand the heat get out of the kitchen if you lie down with dogs, you will get up with fleas if you pay peanuts, you get monkeys if you want a thing done well, do it yourself ignorance is bliss imitation is the sincerest form of flattery in for a penny, in for a pound in the kingdom of the blind the one eyed man is king in the midst of life we are in death into every life a little rain must fall it ain't over till the fat lady sings it goes without saying it is best to be on the safe side it is better to give than to receive it is easy to be wise after the event it never rains but it pours it takes a thief to catch a thief it takes all sorts to make a world it takes one to know one it takes two to tango it's all grist to the mill it's an ill wind that blows no one any good it's better to give than to receive it's better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all it's better to light a candle than curse the darkness it's better to travel hopefully than to arrive it's never too late it's no use crying over spilt milk it's no use locking the stable door after the horse has bolted it's the early bird that catches the worm it's the empty can that makes the most noise it's the singer not the song it's the squeaky wheel that gets the grease jack of all trades, master of none judge not, that ye be not judged keep your chin up keep your friends close and your enemies closer keep your powder dry laugh and the world laughs with you, weep and you weep alone laughter is the best medicine least said, soonest mended less is more let bygones be bygones let not the sun go down on your wrath let sleeping dogs lie let the buyer beware let the dead bury the dead let the punishment fit the crime let well alone life begins at forty life is just a bowl of cherries life is what you make it life's not all beer and skittles lightning never strikes twice in the same place like father, like son little pitchers have big ears little strokes fell great oaks little things please little minds live and learn live for today for tomorrow never comes look before you leap love of money is the root of all evil love is blind love makes the world go round love thy neighbour as thyself love will find a way make hay while the sun shines make love not war man does not live by bread alone manners maketh man many a little makes a mickle many a mickle makes a muckle many a true word is spoken in jest many are called but few are chosen many hands make light work march comes in like a lion, and goes out like a lamb march winds and april showers bring forth may flowers marriages are made in heaven marry in haste, repent at leisure might is right mighty oaks from little acorns grow misery loves company moderation in all things monday's child is fair of face, tuesday's child is full of grace, wednesday's child is full of woe, thursday's child has far to go, friday's child is loving and giving, saturday's child works hard for its living, and a child that's born on the sabbath day is fair and wise and good and gay. money doesn't grow on trees money is the root of all evil money isn't everything money makes the world go round money talks more haste, less speed music has charms to soothe the savage breast nature abhors a vacuum necessity is the mother of invention needs must when the devil drives ne'er cast a clout till may be out never give a sucker an even break never go to bed on an argument never judge a book by its cover never let the sun go down on your anger never look a gift horse in the mouth never put off until tomorrow what you can do today never speak ill of the dead never tell tales out of school nine tailors make a man no man can serve two masters no man is an island no names, no pack drill no news is good news no one can make you feel inferior without your consent no pain, no gain no rest for the wicked nothing new under the sun nothing is certain but death and taxes nothing succeeds like success nothing ventured, nothing gained oil and water don't mix old soldiers never die, they just fade away once a thief, always a thief once bitten, twice shy one good turn deserves another one half of the world does not know how the other half lives one hand washes the other one man's meat is another man's poison one might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb one law for the rich and another for the poor one swallow does not make a summer one volunteer is worth ten pressed men one year's seeding makes seven years weeding only fools and horses work opportunity never knocks twice at any man's door opposites attract out of sight, out of mind parsley seed goes nine times to the devil patience is a virtue pearls of wisdom penny wise and pound foolish people who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones physician, heal thyself possession is nine points of the law power corrupts absolute power corrupts absolutely practice makes perfect practice what you preach prevention is better than cure pride goes before a fall procrastination is the thief of time put your best foot forward rain before seven, fine before eleven red sky at night shepherd's delight red sky in the morning, shepherd's warning revenge is a dish best served cold revenge is sweet rob peter to pay paul rome wasn't built in a day see a pin and pick it up, all the day you'll have good luck see a pin and let it lie, bad luck you'll have all day see no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil seeing is believing seek and ye shall find set a thief to catch a thief share and share alike shrouds have no pockets silence is golden slow but sure softly, softly, catchee monkey spare the rod and spoil the child speak as you find speak softly and carry a big stick sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me still waters run deep strike while the iron is hot stupid is as stupid does success has many fathers, while failure is an orphan take care of the pence and the pounds will take care of themselves talk is cheap talk of the devil, and he is bound to appear tell the truth and shame the devil that which does not kill us makes us stronger the age of miracles is past the apple never falls far from the tree the best defence is a good offence the best is the enemy of the good the best laid schemes of mice and men gang aft agley the best things in life are free the bigger, the better the bigger they are, the harder they fall the bottom line is the bottom line the boy is father to the man the bread always falls buttered side down the child is the father of the man the cobbler always wears the worst shoes the course of true love never did run smooth the customer is always right the darkest hour is just before the dawn the devil finds work for idle hands to do the devil looks after his own the early bird catches the worm the end justifies the means the exception which proves the rule the female of the species is more deadly than the male the fruit does not fall far from the tree the good die young the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world the husband is always the last to know the labourer is worthy of his hire the law is an ass the leopard does not change his spots the longest journey starts with a single step the more the merrier the more things change, the more they stay the same the only good indian is a dead indian the opera ain't over till the fat lady sings the pen is mightier than sword the price of liberty is eternal vigilance the proof of the pudding is in the eating the road to hell is paved with good intentions the shoemaker's son always goes barefoot the squeaking wheel gets the grease the truth will out the wages of sin is death the way to a man's heart is through his stomach the whole is greater than the sum of the parts there are more ways of killing a cat than choking it with cream there are none so blind as those, that will not see there are two sides to every question there but for the grace of god, go i there's a time and a place for everything there's an exception to every rule there's always more fish in the sea there's honour among thieves there's many a good tune played on an old fiddle there's many a slip 'twixt cup and lip there's more than one way to skin a cat there's no accounting for tastes there's no fool like an old fool there's no place like home there's no smoke without fire there's no such thing as a free lunch there's no such thing as bad publicity there's no time like the present there's none so blind as those who will not see there's none so deaf as those who will not hear there's nowt so queer as folk there's one born every minute there's safety in numbers they that sow the wind, shall reap the whirlwind third time lucky those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it those who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones those who sleep with dogs will rise with fleas thou shalt not kill time and tide wait for no man time flies time is a great healer time is money time will tell 'tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at all to err is human to forgive divine to every thing there is a season to the victor go the spoils to travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive tomorrow is another day tomorrow never comes too many cooks spoil the broth truth is stranger than fiction truth will out two blacks don't make a white two heads are better than one two is company, but three's a crowd two wrongs don't make a right variety is the spice of life virtue is its own reward walls have ears walnuts and pears you plant for your heirs waste not want not what can't be cured must be endured what goes up must come down what you lose on the swings you gain on the roundabouts what's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander when in rome, do as the romans do when the cat's away the mice will play when the going gets tough, the tough get going when the oak is before the ash, then you will only get a splash when the ash is before the oak, then you may expect a soak what the eye doesn't see, the heart doesn't grieve over where there's a will there's a way where there's muck there's brass while there's life there's hope whom the gods love die young why keep a dog and bark yourself women and children first wonders will never cease work expands so as to fill the time available worrying never did anyone any good you are never too old to learn you are what you eat you can choose your friends but you can't choose your family you can have too much of a good thing you can lead a horse to water, but you can't make it drink you can't have your cake and eat it you can't get blood out of a stone you can't make a silk purse from a sow's ear you can't make an omelette without breaking eggs you can't make bricks without straw you can't run with the hare and hunt with the hounds you can't take it with you when you die you can't teach an old dog new tricks you can't judge a book by its cover you can't win them all you catch more flies with honey than with vinegar you pays your money and you takes your choice you reap what you sow you win some, you lose some youth is wasted on the young a bad workman blames his tools. a book holds a house of gold. a book is like a garden carried in the pocket. a child's life is like a piece of paper on which every person leaves a mark. a clever person turns great troubles into little ones and little ones into none at all. a crisis is an opportunity riding the dangerous wind. a diamond with a flaw is worth more than a pebble without imperfections. a gem is not polished without rubbing, nor a man perfected without trials. a man's conversation is the mirror of his thoughts. a nation's treasure is in its scholars. a person who say it cannot be done should not interrupt the man doing it. a wise man makes his own decisions, an ignorant man follows public opinion. be careful what you water your dreams with. water them with worry and fear and you will produce weeds that choke the life from your dream. water them with optimism and solutions and you will cultivate success. always be on the lookout for ways to turn a problem into an opportunity for success. always be on the lookout for ways to nurture your dream. be not afraid of growing slowly, be afraid only of standing still. black cat or white cat if it can catch mice, it's a good cat. by three methods we may learn wisdom first, by reflection, which is noblest second, by imitation, which is easiest and third by experience, which is the bitterest. dig the well before you are thirsty. do the difficult things while they are easy and do the great things while they are small. a journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step. everyone eats and drinks yet only few appreciate the taste of food. give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime. give me liberty, or give me death he who asks is a fool for five minutes, but he who does not ask remains a fool forever. he who depends on himself will attain the greatest happiness. i'd rather die for speaking out, than to live and be silent. if i am walking with two other men, each of them will serve as my teacher. i will pick out the good points of the one and imitate them, and the bad points of the other and correct them in myself. if you are patient in one moment of anger, you will escape a hundred days of sorrow. if you bow at all, bow low. if you don't want anyone to know, don't do it. if you shoot for the stars and hit the moon, it's ok. but you've got to shoot for something. a lot of people don't even shoot. if you think in terms of a year, plant a seed if in terms of ten years, plant trees if in terms of years, teach the people. let's put our heads together for the benefit of all. life is finite, while knowledge is infinite. life is really simple, but we insist on making it complicated. like weather, one's fortune may change by the evening. make my home everywhere within the four seas. the world is my home. never hesitate to ask a lesser person. nothing is softer or more flexible than water, yet nothing can resist it. lao tzu past scholars studied to improve themselves today's scholars study to impress others. raise your sail one foot and you get ten feet of wind. respond intelligently even to unintelligent treatment. rise and fall of a nation rests with every one of its citizens. seeing it once is better than being told times. to know the road ahead, ask those coming back. we should feel sorrow, but not sink under its oppression. what you do not wish upon yourself, extend not to others. when it is obvious that the goals cannot be reached, don't adjust the goals, adjust the action steps. when you drink the water, remember the spring. when you have only two pennies left in the world, buy a loaf of bread with one, and a lily with the other. "rejoice not at thine enemy's fall" but don't rush to pick his up, either. . a bird that you set free may be caught again, but a word that escapes your lips will not return. a bird that you set free may be caught again, but a word that escapes your lips will not return.. . . a cheerful heart is good medicine, but a crushed spirit dries up the bones. a cheerful heart is good medicine, but a crushed spirit dries up the bones.. . . a friend you have to buy enemies you get for nothing. a friend you have to buy enemies you get for nothing.. . . a good son in law is like the acquisition of a new son a bad one is like the loss of your daughter. a good son in law is like the acquisition of a new son a bad one is like the loss of your daughter.. . . a half truth is a whole lie. a half truth is a whole lie.. . . a mother understands what a child does not say. a mother understands what a child does not say.. . . a person worries about the past, distresses about the present, and fears the future. a person worries about the past, distresses about the present, and fears the future.. . . a pessimist, confronted with two bad choices, chooses both. a pessimist, confronted with two bad choices, chooses both.. . . a slave shows his true character, not while he is enslaved but when he becomes a master. a slave shows his true character, not while he is enslaved but when he becomes a master.. . against stupidity god himself is helpless. against stupidity god himself is helpless.. . . all things grow with time except grief. all things grow with time except grief.. . . among those who stand, do not sit among those who sit, do not stand. among those who laugh, do not weep among those who weep, do not laugh. among those who stand, do not sit among those who sit, do not stand. among those who laugh, do not weep among those who weep, do not laugh.. . . anyone who teases you loves you. anyone who teases you loves you.. . . as he thinks in his heart, so he is. as he thinks in his heart, so he is.. . . as you do, so will be done to you. as you do, so will be done to you.. . . as you teach, you learn. as you teach, you learn.. . . ask about your neighbors, then buy the house. ask about your neighbors, then buy the house.. . . be sure to send a lazy man for the angel of death. be sure to send a lazy man for the angel of death.. . . be the day weary or be the day long, at last it ringeth to evensong. be the day weary or be the day long, at last it ringeth to evensong.. . beware of the person who gives you advice according to his own interests. beware of the person who gives you advice according to his own interests.. . . charity is the spice of riches. charity is the spice of riches.. . . commit a sin twice and it will not seem a crime. commit a sin twice and it will not seem a crime.. . . do not ask questions of fairy tales. do not ask questions of fairy tales.. . . do not be wise in words be wise in deeds. do not be wise in words be wise in deeds.. . . do not make yourself so big, you are not so small. do not make yourself so big, you are not so small.. . . do not meet troubles half way. do not meet troubles half way.. . . don't approach a goat from the front, a horse from the back, or a fool from any side. don't approach a goat from the front, a horse from the back, or a fool from any side.. . . don't ask questions of fairy tales. don't ask questions of fairy tales.. . . don't be sweet, lest you be eaten up don't be bitter, lest you be spewed out. don't be sweet, lest you be eaten up don't be bitter, lest you be spewed out.. . don't be too sweet lest you be eaten up don't be too bitter lest you be spewed out. don't be too sweet lest you be eaten up don't be too bitter lest you be spewed out.. . . don't be too sweet, or else you will be eaten up but don't be too bitter, or else you will be spitted out. don't be too sweet, or else you will be eaten up but don't be too bitter, or else you will be spitted out.. . . don't live in a town where there are no doctors. don't live in a town where there are no doctors.. . . don't look a gift horse in the mouth. don't look a gift horse in the mouth.. . . don't look for more honor than your learning merits. don't look for more honor than your learning merits.. . . don't make a fence more expensive or more important than what it is fencing. don't make a fence more expensive or more important than what it is fencing.. . . don't make a mountain out of a molehill. don't make a mountain out of a molehill.. . . don't make a toil of pleasure. don't make a toil of pleasure.. . . don't open a shop unless you know how to smile. don't open a shop unless you know how to smile.. . . don't pick a wasp out of a cream jug. don't pick a wasp out of a cream jug.. . don't sell the sun to buy a candle. don't sell the sun to buy a candle.. . . don't trust someone who tells you all of his troubles and keeps you from all of his joys. don't trust someone who tells you all of his troubles and keeps you from all of his joys.. . . even the most expensive clock still shows sixty minutes in every hour. even the most expensive clock still shows sixty minutes in every hour.. . . first improve yourself, and then judge others. first improve yourself, and then judge others.. . . first learn, and then form opinions. first learn, and then form opinions.. . . first mend yourself, and then mend others. first mend yourself, and then mend others.. . . god could not be everywhere and therefore he made mothers. god could not be everywhere and therefore he made mothers.. . . god couldn't be everywhere, so he created mothers. god couldn't be everywhere, so he created mothers.. . . god gives burdens also shoulders. god gives burdens also shoulders.. . . god is closest to those with broken hearts. god is closest to those with broken hearts.. . he that can't endure the bad, will not live to see the good. he that can't endure the bad, will not live to see the good.. . . he that does not bring up his son to some honest calling and employment, brings him up to be a thief. he that does not bring up his son to some honest calling and employment, brings him up to be a thief.. . . he who prays for his neighbor will be heard for himself. he who prays for his neighbor will be heard for himself.. . . he who puts up with insult invites injury. he who puts up with insult invites injury.. . . hospitality is one form of worship. hospitality is one form of worship.. . . i felt sorry for myself because i had no shoes until i met a man who had no feet. i felt sorry for myself because i had no shoes until i met a man who had no feet.. . . ideas are something that usually comes like fireman too late. ideas are something that usually comes like fireman too late.. . . if charity cost nothing, the world would be full of philanthropists. if charity cost nothing, the world would be full of philanthropists.. . . if god lived on earth, people would break his windows. if god lived on earth, people would break his windows.. . . if not for fear, sin would be sweet. if not for fear, sin would be sweet.. . if the rich could hire someone else to die for them, the poor would make a wonderful living. if the rich could hire someone else to die for them, the poor would make a wonderful living.. . . if the rich could hire the poor to die for them, the poor would make a very nice living. if the rich could hire the poor to die for them, the poor would make a very nice living.. . . if there is bitterness in the heart, sugar in the mouth won't make life sweeter. if there is bitterness in the heart, sugar in the mouth won't make life sweeter.. . . if you can't go over, you must go under. if you can't go over, you must go under.. . . if you don't aspire to great things, you won't attain small things. if you don't aspire to great things, you won't attain small things.. . . if you have money, men think you are wise, handsome, and able to sing like a bird. if you have money, men think you are wise, handsome, and able to sing like a bird.. . . if you lie on the ground, you cannot fall. if you lie on the ground, you cannot fall.. . . in a restaurant choose a table near a waiter. in a restaurant choose a table near a waiter.. . . in choosing a friend, go up a step. in choosing a friend, go up a step.. . . it is easier to guard a sack full of fleas than a girl in love. it is easier to guard a sack full of fleas than a girl in love.. . let your ears hear what your mouth says. let your ears hear what your mouth says.. . . life is the biggest bargain. we get it for nothing. life is the biggest bargain. we get it for nothing.. . . locks keep out only the honest. locks keep out only the honest.. . . loneliness breaks the spirit. loneliness breaks the spirit.. . . look for the good, not the evil, in the conduct of members of the family. look for the good, not the evil, in the conduct of members of the family.. . . loose tongues are worse than wicked hands. loose tongues are worse than wicked hands.. . . make sure to be in with your equals if you're going to fall out with your superiors. make sure to be in with your equals if you're going to fall out with your superiors.. . . make sure to send a lazy man for the angel of death. make sure to send a lazy man for the angel of death.. . . make sure to send a lazy man the angel of death. make sure to send a lazy man the angel of death.. . . never trust people who tell you all their troubles but keep from you all their joys. never trust people who tell you all their troubles but keep from you all their joys.. . never trust the man who tells you all his troubles but keeps from you all his joys. never trust the man who tells you all his troubles but keeps from you all his joys.. . . no one is as deaf as the man who will not listen. no one is as deaf as the man who will not listen.. . . one mother achieves more than a hundred teachers. one mother achieves more than a hundred teachers.. . . one of life's greatest mysteries is how the boy who wasn't good enough to marry your daughter can be the father of the smartest grandchild in the world. one of life's greatest mysteries is how the boy who wasn't good enough to marry your daughter can be the father of the smartest grandchild in the world.. . . only love gives us the taste of eternity. only love gives us the taste of eternity.. . . people are like grass in the field some blossom, some wither. people are like grass in the field some blossom, some wither.. . . people make plans and god laughs. people make plans and god laughs.. . . pray that you will never have to bear all that you are able to endure. pray that you will never have to bear all that you are able to endure.. . . prepare your proof before you argue. prepare your proof before you argue.. . . pride is the mask of one's own faults. pride is the mask of one's own faults.. . pride joined with many virtues chokes them all. pride joined with many virtues chokes them all.. . . pride that dined with vanity supped with poverty. pride that dined with vanity supped with poverty.. . . sympathy doesn't provide food, but it makes hunger more endurable. sympathy doesn't provide food, but it makes hunger more endurable.. . . sympathy doesn't provide food, but it makes hunger more endurable. sympathy doesn't provide food, but it makes hunger more endurable.. . . sympathy is a little medicine to soothe the ache in another's heart. sympathy is a little medicine to soothe the ache in another's heart.. . . teach your tongue to say "i don't know" instead of to make up something. teach your tongue to say . the good fellow to everyone is a good friend to no one. the good fellow to everyone is a good friend to no one.. . . the innkeeper loves a drunkard, but not for a son in law. the innkeeper loves a drunkard, but not for a son in law.. . . the man who gives little with a smile gives more than the man who gives much with a frown. the man who gives little with a smile gives more than the man who gives much with a frown.. . . the only truly dead are those who have been forgotten. the only truly dead are those who have been forgotten.. . the person who only accepts friends without faults will never have any real friends. the person who only accepts friends without faults will never have any real friends.. . . the poor fool is a man who falls on his back and breaks his nose. the poor fool is a man who falls on his back and breaks his nose.. . . the rich man carries god in his pocket, the poor man in his heart. the rich man carries god in his pocket, the poor man in his heart.. . . the righteous say little and do much. the righteous say little and do much.. . . there is no book that contains absolutely nothing bad, and there is no book that contains absolutely nothing good. there is no book that contains absolutely nothing bad, and there is no book that contains absolutely nothing good.. . . truth is the safest lie. truth is the safest lie.. . . what one has, one doesn't want, and what one wants, one doesn't have. what one has, one doesn't want, and what one wants, one doesn't have.. . . what soap is for the body, tears are for the soul. what soap is for the body, tears are for the soul.. . . what you don't see with your eyes, don't witness with your mouth. what you don't see with your eyes, don't witness with your mouth.. . . what you give for the cause of charity in health is gold what you give in sickness is silver what you give after death is lead. what you give for the cause of charity in health is gold what you give in sickness is silver what you give after death is lead.. . when a father gives to his son, both laugh when a son gives to his father, both cry. when a father gives to his son, both laugh when a son gives to his father, both cry.. . . when a father helps a son, both smile but when a son must help his father, both cry. when a father helps a son, both smile but when a son must help his father, both cry.. . . when a habit begins to cost money, it's called a hobby. when a habit begins to cost money, it's called a hobby.. . . when con men meet a legitimately honest man, they are so bewildered that they consider him a greater con man than themselves. when con men meet a legitimately honest man, they are so bewildered that they consider him a greater con man than themselves.. . . when two divorced people marry, four people get into bed. when two divorced people marry, four people get into bed.. . . when you have no choice, mobilize the spirit of courage. when you have no choice, mobilize the spirit of courage.. . . when you open a door, don't forget to close it. treat your mouth accordingly. when you open a door, don't forget to close it. treat your mouth accordingly.. . . where two jews, three opinions. where two jews, three opinions.. . . who finds a faithful friend, finds a treasure. who finds a faithful friend, finds a treasure.. . . whoever does not try, does not learn. whoever does not try, does not learn.. . whoever enjoys his life is doing the creator's will. whoever enjoys his life is doing the creator's will.. . . with money in your pocket, you are wise, and you are handsome, and you sing well too. with money in your pocket, you are wise, and you are handsome, and you sing well too.. . . worries go down better with soup than without. worries go down better with soup than without.. . . you can't force anyone to love you or lend you money. you can't force anyone to love you or lend you money.. . . you don't need intelligence to have luck, but you do need luck to have intelligence. you don't need intelligence to have luck, but you do need luck to have intelligence.. . . your friend has a friend, and your friend's friend has another friend so know when to keep quiet. your friend has a friend, and your friend's friend has another friend so know when to keep quiet.. . . your friend has a friend don't tell him. your friend has a friend don't tell him.. . don t go to another monastery with your own rules. . visiting as a guest is good but it s better at home. , . it s good where we are not present. , . it may seem nicer elsewhere but in reality it may be not any better. every sandpiper praises its own swamp. . people tend to have high opinion about the place the place where they live. where you are born, it s where you are useful. , . you are the most suited to be useful where you were born. don t dig a hole for someone else or you will fall into it yourself. . husband is a head, wife is a neck. , . the head looks to where the neck turns. without work, one cannot pull a fish out of a pond. . anything you do requires effort. no water runs under an idle stone. . work is a wolf, it will not run away to the woods. . no need to hurry working, the job is not going anywhere. work loves fools. . people who love working are not too smart. if you are given something, take it if you are being beaten, run. , . doing something takes time, having fun takes an hour. , . live with wolves, howl like a wolf. . word is silver, silence is gold. , . gray hair in a beard, devil in ribs. . a guy getting to the age of grey hair often becomes mischievous middle age crisis . ride slower, advance further. . don t hurry up, you will reach further distances by going slower. if he beats you, he loves you. . in older times it was considered a duty of the husband to teach his wife, which included physical beating. the saying, unfortunately, is still used today. husband and wife are one satan. . don t get between a husband and his wife, as they are one entity. work is afraid of a master. . it s easy for a specialist to complete a job. eyes are scared but hands do. , . don t be afraid by looking how much you need to accomplish simply start doing it. a spoon is expensive just before the dinner. . fear s eyes are large. . a russian harnesses slowly but rides fast. , . don t teach a wizard. . an apple doesn t fall too far from the apple tree. . a goose is not a friend to a pig. . can t hide a bradawl in a bag. . can t hide something that will make itself obvious quickly. chicks are counted in autumn. . it s best not to check scores too early. the elbow is close but you cannot bite it. , . the first pancake is a lump. . when you do something for the first time, it s usually imperfect. one is not a warrior in a field. . out of fire into a blaze. . got out of one trouble, only to get into another. the child of seven nannies has no eye. . too many people responsible for the same thing all act irresponsibly. an old friend is better than two new ones. . patience and work will grate anything. . with patience and hard work you can accomplish anything you want. learning is light, and absence of learning is darkness. , . a word is not a sparrow, if it flew out, you cannot catch it. , . be careful of what you say as it s not possible to get it back. measure seven times, cut once. . be careful before you do something that cannot be changed. from a mangy sheep get at least a lock of wool. . get at least something, even if you get a lousy opportunity. own shirt is closer to the body. . one s own interests are the most important. out of sight, out of heart. . don t complain about the mirror, if the face is skew. , . you don t know where you will find or lose. , , . hope for god but don t do badly yourself. , . scythe over a stone. . the force came over a stronger force. truth pricks eyes. . honest opinions are unpleasant. for a drunk, the sea is to his knees. . drunk people don t see dangers. what a sober person thinks, the drunk says. , . a try is not a torture. . try it at least, it s not going to hurt you. a friend is found out in a misfortune. . misfortunes help to test if your friendship is real. friendship is friendship, and service is service. , . even though we are friends, i have to fulfill my job responsibilities. love to ride, love to pull the sled. . better to have a tomtit in hands than a crane in the sky. , . better late than never. , . no bad without good. . if something bad happened, look for a silver lining. can t glue a broken cup. . some things could be broken irreparably and nothing can fix them. an affectionate calf sucks from two mothers. . being nice helps you get benefits from different people. strike while the iron is hot. , . use the opportunity while it s possible, or lose it. don t delay until tomorrow what you can do today. , . you reap what you have sawn. , . who gets up early, gets a handout from god. , . who didn t come in time, came late. , . horses aren t changed when crossing a river. . don t change major things in the middle of a job. as the call, so is the echo. , . not everything is gold that shines. , . lovers quarrel is just fun. . thus, don t interrupt with a couple s argument or fight, it s a good thing for them. god doesn t give horns to the caw who loves butting. . everything is given its own time. . a crow is not pecking at another s crow s eye. . live for hundred years, learn for hundred years. . trust but check. , . you don t look at the teeth of the horse that was gifted. . god endured, and told us to do the same . . in a quiet lake, there are demons. . don t denounce prison or poverty. . anyone can lose all their money or be thrown in jail, no matter how they live or behave. a law is like a pole as it turned, so is the result. , . any law can be turned around to achieve an opposite result. one can t jump over the head. . there is a limit to one s abilities. with a beloved person , it s paradise in a hut. . love is not potatoes, one cannot throw it in a window. , . love is something you cannot get rid of. love is cruel, you will even fall in love with a goat. , . love can play a joke on you, you may fall in love with a completely wrong person. you can t escape destiny. . no matter what you do, your fate is predetermined, and what is destined to happen will happen. marriages occur in heaven. . marriages are decided upon by higher forces, which should be surrounded to. endure, and you will fall in love. , . you may not like your partner at first but as you go through challenges together, you will learn to love each other. this saying was used to soothe young husbands or wives that didn t like partners that parents found for them, or the ones who fell out of love after the wedding. from love to hate, a hand can reach. . if you love someone, you can start hating them very quickly. everything new is well forgotten old. . done the task, stroll bravely. , . once you have completed the assigned task, you can relax and do whatever you want. every person is the blacksmith of their own destiny. . 